---
title: "Identifying thresholds of ocean-induced Antarctic ice loss through idealized ice-sheet model simulations"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /outreach/talks/2023-04-24-EGU2023
excerpt: ""
venue: "EGU General Assembly 2023"
date: 2023-04-24
location: "Vienna, Austria"
---

Poster presentation (session [CR3.1 *Modelling ice sheets and glaciers*](https://meetingorganizer.copernicus.org/EGU23/session/45848 "https://meetingorganizer.copernicus.org/EGU23/session/45848")) at the EGU General Assembly 2023 in Vienna, Austria.

## Abstract
The Antarctic Ice Sheet is currently losing mass through ocean induced melting at the underside of its large ice shelves. In the future, ice shelf cavities could switch from a "cold" to a "warm" state, following a distinct increase in ocean temperatures e.g. by a redirection of coastal currents allowing warm circumpolar waters to access Antarctic grounding lines. With the ice-sheet model PISM, we delineate potential thresholds, at which the Antarctic Ice Sheet could experience ocean- induced non-linear ice loss. To this end, we apply circum-Antarctic ocean temperature perturbations of 1 to 5 K for different durations, ranging from tens to hundreds of years, and analyze the ice-sheet evolution after reversing the forcing over centennial to millennial timescales. Additionally, we perform ice-sheet simulations in which we slowly ramp up our forcing over similar timescales. Using these idealized overshoot scenarios, we analyze when and where critical thresholds that lead to large-scale, irreversible grounding line retreat are crossed. We assess uncertainties of these thresholds by analysing the initial state uncertainty as well as parametric and structural uncertainties.

[Download PDF here.](https://meetingorganizer.copernicus.org/EGU23/EGU23-6272.html "https://meetingorganizer.copernicus.org/EGU23/EGU23-6272.html")